feat(blog): the modern code reviewer (#139)
satellytes/satellytes.com: blog-posts/the-modern-code-reviewer-2021.md

---
path: "/blog/the-modern-code-reviewer-2021/"
date: "2021-09-20"
title: "The modern code reviewer"
featuredImage: images/IBM_Electronic_Data_Processing_Machine_-_GPN-2000-001881.jpg
seoMetaText: A differentiated way to conduct pull requests code reviews to improve the PR throughput. Let your people choose a code review intensity that matches their experience, confidence, involvement, role, available time and project timeline.
teaserText: A differentiated way to conduct pull requests code reviews to improve the PR throughput. Let your people choose a code review intensity that matches their experience, confidence, involvement, role, available time and project timeline.
attribution:
    creator: NASA
    source: https://de.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datei:IBM_Electronic_Data_Processing_Machine_-_GPN-2000-001881.jpg
author: Georgios Kaleadis
authorSummary: "CTO at Satellytes"
---

## Long story short

> In this blog post I try to propose a differentiated way to conduct pull requests code reviews to improve their throughput. Let your people choose a code review intensity that matches their experience, confidence, involvement, role, available time and project timeline. You do this by offering three different pull request review types: **shallow review**, **common review** and **expert review.** This will make the review much more accessible to everyone of your team, including new team members and the rather shy ones. Additionally your most involved people, who are usually the bottleneck, will get an instrument to conduct code reviews with reduced intensities when it's not always required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post I try to propose a differentiated way to conduct pull requests code reviews to improve their throughput. Let your people choose a code review intensity that matches their experience, confidence, involvement, role, available time and project timeline. You do this by offering three different pull request review types: **shallow review**, **common review** and **expert review.** This will make the review much more accessible to everyone of your team, including new team members and the rather shy ones. Additionally your most involved people, who are usually the bottleneck, will get an instrument to conduct code reviews with reduced intensity in cases where it is sufficient.
```

Author: I don't understand why it's telling me that your feedback is outdated? I did not push anything afterwards or shortly before your review? I will check them even if they are outdated. I really appreciate your feedback🙏

# Introduction

Have you ever heard about the [Fagan inspection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fagan_inspection) ? It's the first formalized system of a **peer review** for documents which includes source code. Formal **peer code reviews** are probably the reason why [space rockets don't blow up](https://www.fastcompany.com/28121/they-write-right-stuff) and hopefully [prevent radiation therapy devices from giving overdoses to patients due to a software bug (Therac-25)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Therac-25).

Creating software for the web is less life-threatening, more forgiving and happens in much faster development cycles, so we can easily fix bugs and add more features. That's why we can use less formal ways to inspect the code we are writing day by day. Pair programming and over-the-shoulder are two very simple and powerful ways to review code, but they are synchronous and require some previous alignment. The majority of code changes we observe these days are going through [Pull Requests](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/PullRequest.html).

> Pull Requests are also the breeding ground for toxic behavior though. When people nitpick and fight over small details like [code indentations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SsoOG6ZeyUI), [semicolons](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap/issues/3057) or [curlies](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/2715/should-curly-braces-appear-on-their-own-line) than it's probably caused by the text-based and asynchronous nature of this peer code review type. Thankfully you can agree on issues like that in beforehand and collect them in a [contribution guideline](https://mozillascience.github.io/working-open-workshop/contributing/) to focus on the real problem: Finding the defects in a given code change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pull Requests are also the breeding ground for toxic behavior though. When people nitpick and fight over small details like [code indentations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SsoOG6ZeyUI), [semicolons](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap/issues/3057) or [curlies](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/2715/should-curly-braces-appear-on-their-own-line) then it's probably caused by the text-based and asynchronous nature of this peer code review type. Thankfully you can agree on issues like that beforehand and collect them in a [contribution guideline](https://mozillascience.github.io/working-open-workshop/contributing/) to focus on the real problem: Finding the defects in a given code change.
```

- Your day is **full of meetings** while your colleagues are programming one new feature after the other. Although you use the breaks between the meetings to check mails and reading the review requests you will never ever be able to check the actual pull request. You trust your peers to review and you get back to your meeting.

### **Lack of knowledge**

You can observe a lack of knowledge and confidence usually among new team members, inexperienced colleagues or in general insecure persons.

- You're not **fully involved** in the topic, therefore you don't feel suited to review the code.
- You're **new to the team**. and you don't think it's appropriate to provide reviews in a codebase you don't fully understand.

### **Lack of confidence**

- You are an **inexperienced developer** and the things you see in a PR, they just scare you.
- You feel intimidated. You don't feel comfortable reviewing a given PR, because the PR is created by a seasoned colleague with a much **higher level.** Your feedback is not worth nor expected.

> - It's a super **complex PR**. I don't even understand the problem it's solving. I feel **intimidated** and leave the fun to others.

Reviewer: the other bullet points all address another person while this one is written in the first person. is this intentional?

Author: I have problems sticking to one person sometimes 😁 Thanks for pointing this out. Had something similar at another place and I will rewrite it.

> - You're **new to the team**. It's **intimidating** to review and potentially criticize code of my new colleagues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You're **new to the team**. It's **intimidating** to review and potentially criticize code of your new colleagues.
```

### **Lack of accessibility**

- There is either **no PR description** or just a single sentence for a rather complex change. You are unable to comprehend the changes with the lack of context given or at least some instructions to follow and to check. That's why you **procrastinate** and secretly hope for someone else to fulfil the review duty.
- An opened PR is **massive in size**, so you **procrastinate** that huge task for days.

### **Lack of empathy**

> - You don't **feel other people's pain** when waiting for a PR review. Instead you focus on your work, create your own PR and expecting people to jump in the review right away.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You don't **feel other people's pain** when waiting for a PR review. Instead you focus on your work, create your own PR and expect people to jump in the review right away.
```

> - There are plenty of PRs open but you have your own important and urgent code changes. Instead of participating in the review to clear the review jam you have to create yet another one**.** In addition you explicitly ask people to review your PR to move to the front of the queue. ****You do this because otherwise your PR will lay around for days. Instead of solving or discussing the problem with the team you are **selfish and unfair** to your colleagues by trying to get your own stuff covered while ignoring the rest.

Reviewer: not sure what exactly should be emphasized in bold here, but the markdown is probably not as it should be
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/68643437/134215778-d444dbf3-9016-426d-82d0-1723d1e10906.png)

Author: I think you started the review on an outdated commit, maybe because the window was open during the day? Because I pushed an updated a 1-2 hours after I posted the message in Slack. I fixed this stuff in there, thanks for catching it here 🙌

The novelty of the approach is the explicitly given choice. A contribution guideline rarely describes how to conduct a review so people usually conduct code reviews following their gut feeling and to fit expectations. This means it highly depends on the person how a review is conducted. You are the alpha geek of your team? Of course you have to go into depth for every single PR which will make you a bottle neck if everyone relies on your reviews. Your are a less experienced developer? You will probably conduct a common review which takes high amounts of time for you, because of the overwhelming complexity or size of your project. You are new to the team and you fear to provide a common review so you decide not to take part in the review process at all.

This code review pattern gives you a choice so you can fit more reviews in the same amount of time while dedicating enough time to the important changes while reducing your investment on trivial changes or things that can easily be changed if not perfect.

## The shallow review

> T**he shallow review** is best ****suited for peers who are in a hurry (lacking time), not deeply involved (lacking knowledge) or feel intimidated by the code or experience of the reviewee (lacking confidence). A majority of pull requests should be suitable for this code review type, as long and they have a small enough size. When a code change introduces major architectural changes, people with shallow reviews are still welcomed but the reviewee must additionally require in-depth reviews.

Reviewer: probably the stars got a bit mixed up in this markup ✨ 
also a typo in "as long **as** they have a small enough size" and possibly "with shallow reviews are still **welcome** but"

### The reviewer's cost

Typically such a shallow review should be completed within 5 to 10 minutes. That will allow you to conduct multiple pull request reviews per day. **The cognitive load is rather low**, so you can squeeze them in whenever you transition to another task or before or after breaks. The review type is ideal for small features and additions, fixes and code refactorings.

### How to conduct

- Carefully read the PR description or any linked ticket to understand the problem
- Glimpse through the PR to check in your mind if that indeed could solve the problem or deliver the feature.
- Leave some positive comments or any doubts.
- Feel free to ask a question for something you don't understand

> - Phrase some summary and submit. done. feasible in some cases even in less than 5 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Phrase some summary and submit. Done. Feasible in some cases even in less than 5 minutes.
```

Author: I have rephrased it to sound less colloquial🙏
> Phrase some summary and then submit to complete the review.

- You can always approve the changes. You should not block any code review though. This requires further interaction while you clearly decided not to invest much time and thoughts by choosing a shallow review. Leave your review as a comment instead. Take notes of your doubts so other reviewers can jump in or you can come back a second time if possible.
- Be transparent and make sure that you note, that you only conducted a shallow review.

### **What the reviewee gets**

The reviewee will get an overall confirmation that their solution works and that it's well tested if necessary. In addition people might be able to spot mistakes and code quality issues while glimpsing through the files. The reviewer will make sure that the code changes are working as intended.

### **What the reviewee w**on't get

> The reviewee won't get detailed **f**eedback for their code, extensive discussions around the chosen methodology, people running your code. It's a confirmation of the validity and correctness of the change and the reviewee won't get many insights on [code elegance](https://blog.codinghorror.com/code-elegance-code-balance/), edge cases, or the architectural choices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reviewee won't get detailed **f**eedback for their code, extensive discussions around the chosen methodology, people running your code. It's a confirmation of the validity and correctness of the change and the reviewee won't get many insights on [code elegance](https://blog.codinghorror.com/code-elegance-code-balance/), edge cases, or the architectural choices.
```

### How to conduct

- Carefully read the corresponding issue and the PR description
- Make sure to go over every single file. Your task is to have seen every single code change. Your review tool like GitHub or GitLab offers checkboxes to get through any amount of files without becoming lost.

![the%20modern%20code%20reviewer%20b58b707424b34cdda29c2540ae08c5cd/Screen_Shot_2021-08-10_at_14.48.19.png](the%20modern%20code%20reviewer%20b58b707424b34cdda29c2540ae08c5cd/Screen_Shot_2021-08-10_at_14.48.19.png)

- Make sure you understand every single change. If not ask through an inline comment.
- Lookout for careless mistakes (wrong signs, typos).
- Leave some praise for the good parts 👍
- Try to spot irregularities in code that jump to mind. Can be things that are too complex to understand, functions that are too big or simply things that seem not to fit the existing codebase. Provide a comment to share your doubts.
- Challenge the solution. Does it really fit the stated problem? Ask questions and fuel a discussion.

> - Write a note about aspects that could be improved but that are not crucial of the acceptance of the PR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Write a note about aspects that could be improved but that are not crucial of the acceptance of the PR.
```

- Look out for tests. Do they test relevant things? Are they present at all?
- Optionally you run the code locally and verify the expected results. Can you break it?
- Write a summary of your findings and if required repeat the important things to change or future things to improve beyond this PR. Such a summary improves the accessibility of your feedback and makes the pull request more enjoyable.

This type of review requires quite some time and dedication. Depending on the size of a PR you can easily spend 20-45min for the initial review not counting in any required feedback iteration.

### **What the reviewee gets**

The reviewee will get a thorough review of their changes. People will happily discuss, ask questions and provide insights, tips & improvements. The reviewer will make sure that the code changes are good enough to land in the production branch and that the overall architecture is properly extended and obeyed.

### **What the reviewee w**on't get

> The purpose of this type of review is to provide feedback in order to shape and approve a rocking solid code change which can include new and additional features but not drastic architectural changes or the introduction of other new concepts and approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this type of review is to provide feedback in order to shape and approve a rock-solid code change which can include new and additional features but not drastic architectural changes or the introduction of other new concepts and approaches.
```

Author: makes sense, thanks!

## The expert review

Use this mode wisely. It's not suited as your regular mode. Most people should stick to the common review. Whenever you introduce entirely new or very abstract concepts, security related changes or simply complex algorithms you want to have an in-depth review of your changes.

The involved expert reviews the code changes, carefully verifies the tests for relevance and also runs the code locally to verify the expected results.

### The reviewer's cost

> Typically the common review costs you 30 to 60 minutes. The cognitive load is high and intense. People ideally know the in and outs of the affected code parts and they understand the business domain to put the changes into the right context for evaluation. This type of review is ideal for complex features with new architectural decisions which will influence and shape the future of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically the expert review costs you 30 to 60 minutes. The cognitive load is high and intense. People ideally know the in and outs of the affected code parts and they understand the business domain to put the changes into the right context for evaluation. This type of review is ideal for complex features with new architectural decisions which will influence and shape the future of the project.
```

Author: oh I missed that obvious one 😬 thanks.

> The review is also a great candidate to educate and influence less seasoned developers. Give them a chance to work on some complex project and provide an expert review to accompany them in delivering a future-proof change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This type of review is also a great candidate to educate and influence less seasoned developers. Give them a chance to work on some complex project and provide an expert review to accompany them in delivering a future-proof change.
```

Finally the **expert review** is your instrument to ensure an **in-depth review** of content that is pioneering a new approach or introducing security relevant changes.

The moment you understand that you have a choice when you are requested for a code review, you can distribute your time more evenly and steer away from situations that would cause you to be the bottleneck. It's also great to clarify expectations as you can proclaim the way to reviewed. An "I only did a shallow review" makes clear that the PR will deliver a working change without everything being perfect in terms of code quality, architecture and more.

Being team, the knowledge of different code review depths helps you to prevent large backlogs of PRs and frustrated reviewees waiting for some feedback. You have a way to motivate people to take part in the review process who previously lacked the necessary confidence.

# Further improvements

> We focused exclusively on the reviewer yet. Being a reviewee, you can enhance the chances that one of the review types will be seen feasible by the reviewer if you make your PR more accessible. Provide a clear description. Repeat parts of the Jira ticket, make the PR small enough, if it's big tell the reviewer why and tell where to focus on. Give clear instructions to run the code and to follow your changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We focused exclusively on the reviewer for now. Being a reviewee, you can increase the chances that one of the review types will be seen feasible by the reviewer if you make your PR more accessible. Provide a clear description. Repeat parts of the Jira ticket, make the PR small enough, if it's big, tell the reviewer why and tell where to focus on. Give clear instructions to run the code and to follow your changes.
```

Author: Rephrased and cherry picked your changes.

> We focused solely on the reviewer and how to conduct the actual review. Being the author of a PR (reviewee), you can increase the chances to receive a review if you make your PR more accessible.

This will greatly improve your chances to receive a review as you lower the effort to quickly check into your PR and you will encourage people who lack confidence or knowledge to provide their review too.

I'm planning to provide a followup to this blog post describing the ideal pull request which will focus on the reviewer's duty.

# Conclusion

If you want to use the described approach, you need a working code review environment where people trust each other. Shallow reviews won't magically solve your toxic environment. You have to fix the foundation before opimizing your PR throughput.

> Encourage the less experienced colleagues to start with shallow code reviews to actively take part in shaping the future of your code base. Pick your own code review type wisely though. If everyone gets lazy and provides only shallow reviews, your overall coding quality might suffer, because nobody takes their time to check the important details of a code change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encourage the less experienced colleagues to start with shallow code reviews to actively take part in shaping the future of your code base. Pick your own code review type wisely though. If everyone gets lazy and provides only shallow reviews, your overall code quality might suffer, because nobody takes their time to check the important details of a code change.
```
